aoa.md, before:

# Articles of Association

Version: 0.1-alpha

## Clarification of Terminology

* Under these Articles of Association we consider computer programs as free
  software, or "open source software", which the originator puts into the public
  domain free of charge and in an irretrievable manner. In doing so, the
  originator allows others the freedom to use the program for any purpose, to
  study how the program functions, to adapt it to his/her own needs, to copy it
  for others and to improve the program and make these changes available for the
  common good.
* Developing free software in the sense of these Articles of Association consists
  of research and compilation of basic principles and concepts as well as their
  test by programming and test of free software which implement such concepts
  and basic principles.
* "Software Defined Radio", or "SDR" for short, refers to the technology of
  building wireless or digital signal processing applications using software or
  programmable logic.
* A "real-time" event is an event in which all participants are participating
  synchronously. Examples for real-time events include in-person meetings, or
  online meetings where all participants are connected via voice-over-IP
  software, and participants always have the opportunity to raise their voice or
  hands. An asynchronous event is an event in which there is no real-time
  component, and participants can participate in their own time. Examples for
  asynchronous events include email chains, online polls, or internet votes.
* An "internet vote" is a mechanism for holding votes (or possibly elections)
  online without requiring physical presence of members.

## 1. Name of the Organization

The terms "GNU Radio" and "GNU Radio Project" are colloquially often used to
refer to both the GNU Radio software as well as the organization itself. For
the remainder of this document, we use "GNU Radio" to refer to the codebase of
GNU Radio and all related artefacts, such as git repositories, out-of-tree
modules administered by the GNU Radio Organization, graphics, logos, and
documents. The "GNU Radio Association", or simply "the Association" shall refer
to the group of people and their activities, such as GRCon, hackfests or
research activities.

## 2. Purpose of the Organization

1. The Association's purpose is the promotion and distribution of software
   defined radio software in terms of free software, and the software "GNU Radio"
   in particular, to promote the free exchange of knowledge and equality of
   opportunity in accessing software as well as education, science and research,
   and to build and grow a community which in turn fosters the development of
   new ideas, promotes the expansion of knowledge, and supports the ever growing
   network of projects relying on Software Defined Radio.
2. The aim of the articles of association is to promote
   a. education, exchange of opinions and cooperation between users, developers
      and researchers
   b. research and debate on the impact of free SDR software and the notion of
      free software on society and science
   c. continuous development and research into free SDR software
   d. enhanced access to free SDR software, supporting media, data and
      documentation and the compilation and distribution of relevant material
   e. contributions and articles providing competent information to the public
      within the association's field of activity and presence at trade fares and
      conferences, making information available to a broad spectrum of users
   f. organisation of conferences and lectures open to the general public, which
      aim at promoting further training of project members and users

## 3. Type of Association

The GNU Radio Association is organized as a sub-project under the umbrella of
the SETI Institute.

## 4. Types of Membership and Members of the Association

1. Active Members are natural persons supporting the Association's purpose and
   aims through their cooperation and who in doing so take over the complete
   duties of an association member. Primarily, they are expected to cooperate,
   participate in the general assembly and exercise their voting rights.
   * Active Members of the Association are also called "Officers of the GNU Radio
     Project".
2. Active membership will be granted if
   * suggested by an active member and supported by two other active members, and if
   * the general assembly decides to grant it or if a simple majority of the
     active members is obtained by means of an internet vote.
   The main criterion for granting membership should be the candidate's commitment
   over a longer period of time and the contributions they made in order to fulfil
   the Association's aims, as well as their commitment to uphold the Association's
   code of conduct.
   Participation in the GNU Radio Organization is not limited to active members,
   and in fact is encouraged for non-members.
3. The membership terminates due to exit, expulsion, or death of the member.
   Membership may be terminated at any time by the member in writing to the board.
4. The Board may decide to expel members. The expulsion of a member is reserved
   for critical situations, and generally it will be considered preferable to
   find a peaceful solution.
   The following
   reasons may cause an expulsion:
   * if a member violates regulations contained in any one of:
     * the Articles of Association,
     * the purpose and aim of the Association, or
     * the Code of Conduct
     and an attempt to clarify the situation was unsuccessful.
   After the Board has decided to expel a member and has informed them about the
   decision, the member must have the opportunity to justify or explain their
   actions. An objection to such an expulsion may be filed with the Board within
   four weeks and will be voted on during the next general meeting. Until such
   decision will be taken by the general meeting, the member's rights and duties
   remain dormant.
   If no objection is filed, expulsion becomes effective immediately after the
   period for filing objections has passed. The member's rights and duties remain
   dormant during this period.
5. If a member leaves the Association or the Association is liquidated, no member
   has a right of reimbursement for the assets they may have contributed.

It is the intention of the Association to amend this paragraph at a later time
in accordance with our other stated purpose and with accordance to the voting
procedures laid out in the voting procedure by-laws.

In particular, it is the intent of the GNU Radio Organization to include other
types of memberships, such as "supporting" or "passive" members, and to allow
legal persons to become members, without voting rights.


## 5. Organs of the Association

The organs of the Association are:

* the General Assembly and
* the Board.

## 6. General Assembly

1. The General Assembly consists of all of the Association's active members, who
   have one vote each.
2. The General Assembly meets for a real-time event least once a year. The Board
   invites the members per mail or email, providing a preliminary agenda. The
   invitation has to be sent at least six weeks prior to the meeting. The time
   limit starts on the day after the invitation was sent. The date of the post
   mark and the date when the email was sent are binding. The invitation letter
   is considered as delivered, if it was addressed to the last address the member
   advised in writing. The members may submit additional agenda items to the board
   either in writing or electronically until two weeks before the assembly. The
   date when the letter or email was received is binding. The Board will publish
   the final agenda in the internet, and the address is to be mentioned in the
   written invitation.
3. If it is in the Association's interest, an extraordinary General Assembly may
   be called for. If this request is submitted to the Board in written form by at
   least 20% of the members, the Board is compelled to call for an extraordinary
   General Assembly within six weeks. The member’s request must contain the
   desired agenda item.
4. Independent from the number of members present, the General Assembly only has
   a quorum if the invitation was submitted in proper form. It nominates one of
   the members present as head of the General Assembly. Unless otherwise decided
   by the General Assembly, all decisions will be taken openly by show of hands
   and with a simple majority. Should the number of pro and contra votes should
   be equal, the application is considered as dismissed.
5. Differing from (4), a majority of ¾ of the votes of the General Assembly and a
   minimum of half of the votes of all active members are necessary to amend or
   change the Articles of Association or decide the liquidation of the Association.
6. An active member who cannot personally participate in the General Assembly may
   ask another member, who will be personally present, to represent him during the
   General Assembly. The representative will exercise both members’ voting rights.
   The representative will legitimise himself at the beginning of the General
   Assembly by presenting to the Board the original of a written authorisation.
   1. A representative may represent a maximum of two additional members.
7. The General Assembly may occur asynchronously for certain purposes. An
   asynchronous General Assembly requires that all members are informed of the
   event one week ahead of time by electronic means. Asynchronous General Assemblies
   are only possible for a single purpose, e.g., making a decision on a purchase.
   A by-law defines the procedure for taking decisions asynchronously.


## 7. Duties of the General Assembly

The General Assembly is the highest decision making organ of the Association and
is generally in charge of all duties, unless these Articles of Association have
assigned specific duties to another organ of the Association.

1. The General Assembly elects the board from a number of active members. The
   people obtaining the largest numbers of votes will be elected.
2. The General Assembly may deselect a board member. Differing from (1), this
   process requires the majority of votes of all active members.
3. The General Assembly decides about the objections of members the Board intends
   to expel.
4. The General Assembly receives the Board’s annual report and discharges the
   board's responsibilities.
5. The right to decide about amendments to the Articles of Association or a
   liquidation of the association is reserved to the General Assembly.
6. The annual accounts and the annual report have to be presented in
   written format to the General Assembly for decision making and discharge of
   the board, two weeks prior to the date of the general assembly.
7. Furthermore the General Assembly has the exclusive right to decide about any
   financial transaction (including, but not limited to, the purchase or sale of
   items, payment of reimbursements, or any other fee).
8. It has the right to decide about all matters board or members submit to it.
9. The following items can only be decided in a real-time General Assembly as
   organized according to §6 (2):
   * Board Elections
   * Membership / Expulsion disputes
   * Changes to the Articles of Association or Code of Conduct

## 8. The Board

1. The Board consists of 3 persons, and only natural persons can be board
   members. They are elected for a 2 years term. Re-election is permitted. The
   respective board members remain in office after expiration of their term
   until a successor is elected.
2. From its midst the Board elects a president and two proxies
   Re-election is permitted.
3. The Board's duties, namely all regulations pertaining to calling for board
   meetings, meeting procedures and voting process are stipulated in the by-laws
   of the board, which it has to decide unanimously.
4. The board decides about all matters pertaining to the association, unless a
   decision of the General Assembly is required. It implements the decisions
   taken by the General Assembly.
5. Each individual board member has the right to represent the Association to
   outside parties.
6. Should a board member quit while in office, the board appoints a provisional
   board member on the basis of an internet vote in which all active members
   participate. The provisional board member remains in office until the General
   Assembly takes place. The General Assembly decides about the definite
   succession within the board.
7. Amendments to the Articles of Association demanded by regulatory, court or
   financial authorities for formal reasons may be undertaken by the board. The
   General Assembly has to be informed of such amendments in its next meeting.

## 9. By-Laws

The by-laws govern all details of the Associations activities which are not
covered in the Articles of Association. The Board implements the by-laws
following the members approval.
The General Assembly decides about by-laws with a simple majority.

## 10. Meeting Minutes

All decisions taken by the Board and General Assembly will be documented in
writing and are available for the members' perusal. The minutes are signed by
the president and the taker of the minutes.

## 11. Finances

The funds required for the Association are raised through

* contributions by the federal states, town councils and other public bodies,
* donations,
* other financial contributions made by third parties, or
* benefits paid to the Association for activities it pursues for the common good,
  including lectures.

In case of a dissolution or liquidation of the association all its assets will
become property of the SETI Institute, which has to use them exclusively and
directly for non-for-profit purposes only according the aims of this articles.

## 12. Code of Conduct and CARE Team

The GNU Radio Organization follows a Code of Conduct (CoC) which is tracked in a
separate document.

It is the matter of the board and all active members to uphold the code of
conduct on all occasions related to the GNU Radio Organization, including, but
not limited to, exchanges on the public GNU Radio mailing list and chat servers,
, the GNU Radio Conference, and hackfests organized by the GNU Radio
Organization.

In addition, a CoC team is appointed by the board. Its job is to act upon CoC
violations, and suggest courses of action to the board.

## 13. Inception of the Articles of Association

These Articles of Association came into effect following a decision by the
General Assembly on $DATE.

Commit message:

Updating "open source" definition, expulsion rules
A few minor changes, but two larger ones:

1) I changed how "open source" is defined to mean released under an OSI-approved license
2) I removed reason for expulsion being "violating the aim of the Assocation", as it didn't fit in the framing of a regulation
3) I removed the requirement that there be an attempt to resolve prior to expulsion, which we may not want in situations like a major CoC violation, for example

aoa.md, after:

# Articles of Association

Version: 0.1-alpha

## Clarification of Terminology

* Under these Articles of Association we consider computer programs as free
  software, or "open source software", which the originator makes available under 
  an Open Source Initiative (OSI) approved license. In doing so, the
  originator gives others the freedom to use the program for any purpose, to
  study how the program functions, to adapt it to his/her own needs, to copy it
  for others and to improve the program and make these changes available for the
  common good.
* Developing free software in the sense of these Articles of Association consists
  of research and compilation of basic principles and concepts as well as 
  implementation of such concepts and basic principles.
* "Software Defined Radio", "Software Radio", or "SDR" for short, refers to the 
  technology of building wireless or digital signal processing applications using 
  software or programmable logic.
* A "real-time" event is an event in which all participants are participating
  synchronously. Examples for real-time events include in-person meetings, or
  online meetings where all participants are connected via voice-over-IP
  software, and participants always have the opportunity to raise their voice or
  hands. An asynchronous event is an event in which there is no real-time
  component, and participants can participate in their own time. Examples for
  asynchronous events include email chains, online polls, or internet votes.
* An "internet vote" is a mechanism for holding votes (or possibly elections)
  online without requiring physical presence of members.

## 1. Name of the Organization

The terms "GNU Radio" and "GNU Radio Project" are colloquially often used to
refer to both the GNU Radio software as well as the organization itself. For
the remainder of this document, we use "GNU Radio" to refer to the codebase of
GNU Radio and all related artefacts, such as git repositories, out-of-tree
modules administered by the GNU Radio Organization, graphics, logos, and
documents. The "GNU Radio Association", or simply "the Association" shall refer
to the group of people and their activities, such as GRCon, hackfests or
research activities.

## 2. Purpose of the Organization

1. The Association's purpose is the promotion and distribution of software
   defined radio software in terms of free software, and the software "GNU Radio"
   in particular, to promote the free exchange of knowledge and equality of
   opportunity in accessing software as well as education, science and research,
   and to build and grow a community which in turn fosters the development of
   new ideas, promotes the expansion of knowledge, and supports the ever growing
   network of projects relying on Software Defined Radio.
2. The aim of the articles of association is to promote
   a. education, exchange of opinions and cooperation between users, developers
      and researchers
   b. research and debate on the impact of free SDR software and the notion of
      free software on society and science
   c. continuous development and research into free SDR software
   d. enhanced access to free SDR software, supporting media, data and
      documentation and the compilation and distribution of relevant material
   e. contributions and articles providing competent information to the public
      within the association's field of activity and presence at trade fares and
      conferences, making information available to a broad spectrum of users
   f. organisation of conferences and lectures open to the general public, which
      aim at promoting further training of project members and users

## 3. Type of Association

The GNU Radio Association is organized as a sub-project under the umbrella of
the SETI Institute.

## 4. Types of Membership and Members of the Association

1. Active Members are natural persons supporting the Association's purpose and
   aims through their cooperation and who in doing so take over the complete
   duties of an association member. Primarily, they are expected to cooperate,
   participate in the general assembly and exercise their voting rights.
   * Active Members of the Association are also called "Officers of the GNU Radio
     Project".
2. Active membership will be granted if
   * suggested by an active member and supported by two other active members, and if
   * the general assembly decides to grant it or if a simple majority of the
     active members is obtained by means of an internet vote.
   The main criterion for granting membership should be the candidate's commitment
   over a longer period of time and the contributions they made in order to fulfil
   the Association's aims, as well as their commitment to uphold the Association's
   code of conduct.
   Participation in the GNU Radio Organization is not limited to active members,
   and in fact is encouraged for non-members.
3. The membership terminates due to exit, expulsion, or death of the member.
   Membership may be terminated at any time by the member in writing to the board.
4. The Board may decide to expel members. The expulsion of a member is reserved
   for critical situations. The following reasons may cause an expulsion:
   * if a member violates regulations contained in any one of:
     * the Articles of Association,
     * the Code of Conduct
   After the Board has decided to expel a member and has informed them about the
   decision, the member must have the opportunity to justify or explain their
   actions. An objection to such an expulsion may be filed with the Board within
   four weeks and will be voted on during the next general meeting. Until such
   decision will be taken by the general meeting, the member's rights and duties
   remain dormant.
   If no objection is filed, expulsion becomes effective immediately after the
   period for filing objections has passed. The member's rights and duties remain
   dormant during this period.
5. If a member leaves the Association or the Association is liquidated, no member
   has a right of reimbursement for the assets they may have contributed.

It is the intention of the Association to amend this paragraph at a later time
in accordance with our other stated purpose and with accordance to the voting
procedures laid out in the voting procedure by-laws.

In particular, it is the intent of the GNU Radio Organization to include other
types of memberships, such as "supporting" or "passive" members, and to allow
legal persons to become members, without voting rights.


## 5. Organs of the Association

The organs of the Association are:

* the General Assembly and
* the Board.

## 6. General Assembly

1. The General Assembly consists of all of the Association's active members, who
   have one vote each.
2. The General Assembly meets for a real-time event least once a year. The Board
   invites the members per mail or email, providing a preliminary agenda. The
   invitation has to be sent at least six weeks prior to the meeting. The time
   limit starts on the day after the invitation was sent. The date of the post
   mark and the date when the email was sent are binding. The invitation letter
   is considered as delivered, if it was addressed to the last address the member
   advised in writing. The members may submit additional agenda items to the board
   either in writing or electronically until two weeks before the assembly. The
   date when the letter or email was received is binding. The Board will publish
   the final agenda in the internet, and the address is to be mentioned in the
   written invitation.
3. If it is in the Association's interest, an extraordinary General Assembly may
   be called for. If this request is submitted to the Board in written form by at
   least 20% of the members, the Board is compelled to call for an extraordinary
   General Assembly within six weeks. The member’s request must contain the
   desired agenda item.
4. Independent from the number of members present, the General Assembly only has
   a quorum if the invitation was submitted in proper form. It nominates one of
   the members present as head of the General Assembly. Unless otherwise decided
   by the General Assembly, all decisions will be taken openly by show of hands
   and with a simple majority. Should the number of pro and contra votes should
   be equal, the application is considered as dismissed.
5. Differing from (4), a majority of ¾ of the votes of the General Assembly and a
   minimum of half of the votes of all active members are necessary to amend or
   change the Articles of Association or decide the liquidation of the Association.
6. An active member who cannot personally participate in the General Assembly may
   ask another member, who will be personally present, to represent him during the
   General Assembly. The representative will exercise both members’ voting rights.
   The representative will legitimise himself at the beginning of the General
   Assembly by presenting to the Board the original of a written authorisation.
   1. A representative may represent a maximum of two additional members.
7. The General Assembly may occur asynchronously for certain purposes. An
   asynchronous General Assembly requires that all members are informed of the
   event one week ahead of time by electronic means. Asynchronous General Assemblies
   are only possible for a single purpose, e.g., making a decision on a purchase.
   A by-law defines the procedure for taking decisions asynchronously.


## 7. Duties of the General Assembly

The General Assembly is the highest decision making organ of the Association and
is generally in charge of all duties, unless these Articles of Association have
assigned specific duties to another organ of the Association.

1. The General Assembly elects the board from a number of active members. The
   people obtaining the largest numbers of votes will be elected.
2. The General Assembly may deselect a board member. Differing from (1), this
   process requires the majority of votes of all active members.
3. The General Assembly decides about the objections of members the Board intends
   to expel.
4. The General Assembly receives the Board’s annual report and discharges the
   board's responsibilities.
5. The right to decide about amendments to the Articles of Association or a
   liquidation of the association is reserved to the General Assembly.
6. The annual accounts and the annual report have to be presented in
   written format to the General Assembly for decision making and discharge of
   the board, two weeks prior to the date of the general assembly.
7. Furthermore the General Assembly has the exclusive right to decide about any
   financial transaction (including, but not limited to, the purchase or sale of
   items, payment of reimbursements, or any other fee).
8. It has the right to decide about all matters board or members submit to it.
9. The following items can only be decided in a real-time General Assembly as
   organized according to §6 (2):
   * Board Elections
   * Membership / Expulsion disputes
   * Changes to the Articles of Association or Code of Conduct

## 8. The Board

1. The Board consists of 3 persons, and only natural persons can be board
   members. They are elected for a 2 years term. Re-election is permitted. The
   respective board members remain in office after expiration of their term
   until a successor is elected.
2. From its midst the Board elects a president and two proxies
   Re-election is permitted.
3. The Board's duties, namely all regulations pertaining to calling for board
   meetings, meeting procedures and voting process are stipulated in the by-laws
   of the board, which it has to decide unanimously.
4. The board decides about all matters pertaining to the association, unless a
   decision of the General Assembly is required. It implements the decisions
   taken by the General Assembly.
5. Each individual board member has the right to represent the Association to
   outside parties.
6. Should a board member quit while in office, the board appoints a provisional
   board member on the basis of an internet vote in which all active members
   participate. The provisional board member remains in office until the General
   Assembly takes place. The General Assembly decides about the definite
   succession within the board.
7. Amendments to the Articles of Association demanded by regulatory, court or
   financial authorities for formal reasons may be undertaken by the board. The
   General Assembly has to be informed of such amendments in its next meeting.

## 9. By-Laws

The by-laws govern all details of the Associations activities which are not
covered in the Articles of Association. The Board implements the by-laws
following the members approval.
The General Assembly decides about by-laws with a simple majority.

## 10. Meeting Minutes

All decisions taken by the Board and General Assembly will be documented in
writing and are available for the members' perusal. The minutes are signed by
the president and the taker of the minutes.

## 11. Finances

The funds required for the Association are raised through

* contributions by the federal states, town councils and other public bodies,
* donations,
* other financial contributions made by third parties, or
* benefits paid to the Association for activities it pursues for the common good,
  including lectures.

In case of a dissolution or liquidation of the association all its assets will
become property of the SETI Institute, which has to use them exclusively and
directly for non-for-profit purposes only according the aims of this articles.

## 12. Code of Conduct and CARE Team

The GNU Radio Organization follows a Code of Conduct (CoC) which is tracked in a
separate document.

It is the matter of the board and all active members to uphold the code of
conduct on all occasions related to the GNU Radio Organization, including, but
not limited to, exchanges on the public GNU Radio mailing list and chat servers,
, the GNU Radio Conference, and hackfests organized by the GNU Radio
Organization.

In addition, a CoC team is appointed by the board. Its job is to act upon CoC
violations, and suggest courses of action to the board.

## 13. Inception of the Articles of Association

These Articles of Association came into effect following a decision by the
General Assembly on $DATE.
