# Rules of Procedures for Online Voting


Version: 0.1-alpha

The articles of association of GNU Radio Organization provide that certain
decisions can be taken by online voting. This includes voting about new members
and deciding about certain rules of procedures, as well as some financial
transactions.
In addition, the GNU Radio Organization allows to use online voting for
decisions which aren't covered in the articles of association. There are several
different types of votes which slightly differ in procedure and method to
calculate results. These rules regulate the procedure of online votes and how
results are calculated. The intention of these rules is to provide a fair and
pragmatic way to let the GNU Radio Organization take decisions by online voting.


## 1. Voting Administrators

The board of the Organization assigns one or more voting administrators which
are responsible for technically performing the voting. This includes sending out
the ballots, receiving the votes, calculating and publishing the results.

The voting administrators must not disclose any information about the identity
of the voters or any other information which isn't contained in the published
voting results.

## 2. General procedure for online voting

An online voting is initiated by a voting proposal followed by a discussion
period. After the discussion period the voting period is started. The voting is
finished by calculating and publishing the voting results.

Results of online votes are effective immediately following publication of the
results unless otherwise stated in the voting proposal.

### 2.1 Voting Proposal

An online voting is initiated by a proposal for voting which states the subject
of the voting. The proposal is sent by email or chat to the membership mailing
list and has to include exact and complete information what is voted upon. Only
the information which is directly included in the mail sent as voting proposal
is subject of the voting.

The voting proposal email has to explicitly be marked as voting proposal by
starting the email subject line or chat message with the string
"Voting Proposal:".

Any active member can initiate a voting by sending a voting proposal.

The member who has initiated a vote can retract the voting proposal by sending
an email to the membership list stating the intention to retract the proposal.

A proposal can only be retracted within the discussion period.

### 2.2 Discussion Period

The discussion period begins on the date the membership mailing list receives
the voting proposal. Unless specified otherwise in the procedures for the
specific type of vote (see: Types of Votes), the discussion period lasts for two
weeks. The discussion period should be used to discuss the voting and form
opinions about the options which are available for voting.

### 2.3 Start of Voting

When the discussion period has finished the voting is started by sending ballots
to all active members. The ballots should include the text of the proposal which
is voted about.

### 2.4 Voting Period

The voting period is started by sending out the ballots. Unless specified
otherwise in the procedures for the specific type of vote (see: Types of Votes),
the voting period lasts for two weeks. During the voting period the active
members cast their votes. Only votes cast within the voting period are
considered for the results of the voting.

### 2.5 End of Voting

After the voting period all cast votes are counted and the results of the voting
are published.

The results of a vote are published to the GNU Radio active membership by
sending them to the membership mailing list. They have to include the number of
persons permitted to vote, the total number of votes, and the number of votes
for each available voting option. The results should also include a statement,
if the voting was valid according to section 5.

## 3 Types of Votes

There are three types of votes: Votes about new members (3.1), elections of
groups of people (3.2), votes for decision (3.3).

### 3.1 Voting about new members

The discussion period is started by sending a new member proposal to the
membership mailing list. Within the discussion period at least two other members
have to declare their support for the vote, otherwise the proposal is considered
to be rejected. If two members declare their support the voting is started after
the discussion period.

The discussion period has a duration of one week and is extended to two weeks,
if requested by a member.

The voting period has a duration of one week.

For new member votes there are three options: "Yes", "No", "Abstain". The new
member is accepted, if there are more "Yes" than "No" votes and the vote isn't
invalid according to section 5.


### 3.2 Electing groups of persons

For elections of groups of people there is an additional candidacy period before
the voting proposal is sent. The person responsible for the execution of the
voting sends a call for candidates to the membership mailing list which starts
the candidacy period. If there is no explicit rule about who is responsible for
execution of the voting, the board is responsible.

The candidacy period lasts two weeks. All members who declare their candidacy in
a statement sent to the membership list become candidates for the election.

After the candidacy period the list of candidates is sent as voting proposal.
This starts the two-weeks discussion period.

The candidates are voted on as options according to section 3.4.

### 3.3 Voting about decisions

The GNU Radio Organization can officially take decisions or decide about
official statements on request of at least three active member. One member has
to send the voting proposal to the membership mailing list. This starts the
discussion period. Within the discussion period at least two other members have
to declare their support for the vote, otherwise the proposal is considered to
be rejected. If two members declare their support the voting is started after
the discussion period.

The responsible party for execution of the voting sends the voting proposal
which includes all options. This starts the discussion period.

After the discussion period the voting is started. The options are voted on
according to section 3.4.

### 3.4 Voting System

#### 3.4.1 Multiple options

If there are more than two options (excluding abstention), the meeting
facilitator (or leader of the vote) shall suggest a meeting procedure. It must
be ensured that all votes count, and that voting for an item cannot count against
it.

#### 3.4.2 Two options

If the number of options is exactly two (excluding abstention), then:

* Each active member can vote with "Yes", "No" or "Abstain".
* If there are more "Yes" than "No" votes and the vote isn't invalid according
  to section 5, the decision is accepted.

#### 4 Right to vote

All members of the GNU Radio Organization which are active members at the time
the voting period is started have the right to cast a vote. The prerequisite for
taking part in online votes is a valid email address in the member database. The
member is solely responsible for initially setting and updating his email
address in the member database.

## 5 Quorum

The result of a voting only becomes effective when the number of votes which
have chosen an option different from "Abstention" is greater than 20 percent of
the number of active members, and the number of votes in total is greater or
equal to 50 percent of the number of active members. If this quorum isn't
reached the voting is considered invalid. An invalid voting can be repeated, but
not before a period of four weeks has passed between publishing the results of
the invalid vote and the proposal for the repeated voting.

## 6 Anonymity

Online votes are anonymous. The information which members participated in the
vote and for which option they voted aren't disclosed. The voting administrators
are allowed to track this information for technically executing the vote. The
information mustn't be used for other purposes and mustn't be made available to
any other people.

## 7 Publication of voting results

All voting results except for rejected votes about new members are published on
the GNU Radio web site, excluding the exact numbers of votes.

## 8 Modification of voting procedure

The board may modify the voting procedures for individual votes upon request of
the GNU Radio membership if good reason for the change, as determined by the
good judgment of the board, is provided.


These rules have been decided by... at ...
